When President Roosevelt came to office in 1933 he faced a desperate nation. A quarter of the American work force was unemployed, the banking industry had been ravaged by failures and defaults, property nationwide had been lost to foreclosures, investment was at a standstill, and the agricultural industry had been decimated (Major Problems, 250-251). There seemed to be no simple solution. However, in his inaugural address Roosevelt emphasized several points that would be central to the legacy of the next decade of New Deal social and economic policies: a dedication to social morality, a re-envisioning of government regulation, and the alleviation of individual suffering by the direct application of a welfare state.

But how to encapsulate all this in a comprehensive and comprehensible political agenda? Roosevelt's policies were unprecedented in scope; no former president had taken on so much at such a dire time in the nations economy. A multitude of interests were at stake, all with different agendas, and all in need of hope. As such, a common theme developed during Roosevelt's presidency that brought together many of those groups: the theory of underconsumption. The underconsumption argument, that the nation was hindered not by a lack of resources, but the lack of resources in the hands of consumers, linked the two pressing issues of the Depression: the individual suffering brought about by foreclosure and unemployment, and the stagnation of the economy as a whole. In addition to providing an overarching framework for economic and legal justifications of New Deal legislation, the underconsumption explanation became a provocative rhetorical platform that helped garner support for the same legislation.

However, the first New Deal policies initially grew out of an appeal to moral duty rather than economic necessity. The creation of the Civilian Conservation Core (CCC) and the Federal Emergency Relief Administration (FERA) were intended to spur employment and alleviate some financial suffering, but lacked the rhetoric of purchasing power arguments that come with later initiatives. At the beginning of his tenure, Roosevelt's goal was to establish the institutions of the welfare state, in benefit of the individual - not programs that immediately led to a national economic revival (Major Problems, 249).

The notion of underconsumption connects economic health to the purchasing power of the nation's populace. If wages increases remain low relative to increases in overall production profits or prices, then the ability of the large working class to return capital to the economy is minimized. By maintaining low wages and monopolistic prices, employers restricted the growth of national markets and limited the ability of markets to adjust to small downturns. Conversely, purchasing power proponents such as the "Believers" argued that increased wages for the working class, which in turn promote consumption, and a regulation of monopolistic prices would lead to the continued expansion of markets and the recovery of a healthy economy (Jacobs, 164-165).

This demand for increased purchasing power permeated many facets of the New Deal. Perhaps most strikingly, the legal breakthroughs of the labor movement, in particular the Wagner Act, were justified legally and politically using the ideas of purchasing power. By arguing that stagnant wages directly affect interstate commerce, labor gained the legal right to organize. As an instrument that gave workers a stake and a voice in the workplace economy by enabling them to advocate for their wages, unions would be able to maintain wages at a level proportional to production and profits (Jacobs, 145-147)